TCR-Seq Methods
 
Matched bone marrow and peripheral blood samples from newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients (n = 4) were isolated analysed by single cell RNA sequencing, inclusive of paired V(D)J sequencing using the 10x Genomics 5’ Chromium™ Next GEM Single Cell V(D)J kit v1.1 as previously described.[1] Briefly, CD8+ T-cells were purified from defrosted mononuclear cell preparations by a two-step procedure: enrichment by magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) using a human CD8+ T-cell Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech, NSW, Australia) followed by fluorescence-activated Cell Sorting (FACS) (FACSAria II, BD Biosciences) to further increase purity of isolated CD8+ T-cells. Purified CD8+ T-cells were mixed with a PCR master mix (containing reverse transcriptase (RT) reagent mix, Poly-DT RT primer, and an RT enzyme mix) and immediately loaded onto a 10x Single Cell A Chip to allow for analysis of ~10,000 cells per sample. Generated libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 (NovaSeq Control Software v.1.6.0 / Real Time Analysis v.3.4.4) using a NovaSeq S4 reagent kit (Illumina, NSW, Australia) as follows: 28bp (Read 1), 91bp (Read 2) and 8bp (Index)), with data created and exported in the binary base call (BCL) format. BCL files generated by Illumina sequencing were feed into the Cell Ranger (v.3.1.0) pipeline for alignment, filtering, barcode counting, and Unique Molecular Identifier (UMI) counting. Raw BCL files were first de-multiplexed and converted to the FASTQ file format using the Cell Ranger ‘mkfastq’ pipeline, a wrapper for Illumina Conversion Software (bcl2fastq v.2.19.0.316). Generated FASTQ files were then either fed into Cell Ranger ‘count’ or ‘vdj’ for scRNA-Seq (5’ GEX) and scTCR-Seq (5’ V(D)J) libraries respectively, outputting the filtered barcode matrix folder (comprising three sparse matrix files detailing cell barcodes and transcriptome) and the filtered_contig_annotation files used in this analysis. The Cell Ranger pipeline was executed on a high-performance cluster running the CentOS operating system (v.6.1) using the GRCh38-3.0.0 reference for alignment of 5’ GEX data and the vdj-GRCh38-alts-ensembl-3.1.0 reference for alignment of 5’ V(D)J data. All data pre-processing was performed using the R package ‘Seurat’ as previously described.[1]
 
Analysis of TCR clonality and diversity was performed with the R packages ‘scRepertoire’ and ‘Immunarch’ for data with and without paired gene-expression data available respectively. Prior to analysis with Immunarch, TCR-Seq data was manually curated of non-productive clones due to differences in the two software packages method of parsing data. Immunarch was used to generate ‘pseudobulk’ data (i.e., splitting paired TCRαβ into TCRα and TCRβ clonotypes) where required. Depending on the analysis, cells were downsampled by either random down-sampling the number of cells to the lowest observed (BM31; 6,262 cells) or probabilistically down-sampling to the lowest number of clonotypes (PB63; 1,267 clonotypes). Cells were considered truly clonal if they shared the same TCR V-J gene pairing and the same CDR3α and/or β nucleotide sequence. Clonal bins were established at log 10 intervals: clones were considered expanded if they accounted for > 10% of a sample’s repertoire, large between 1% and 10%, medium between 0.1% and 1% and small < 0.1%.
 
Sequence similarity was performed using the web-based algorithm for predictive TCR-epitope binding, TCRMatch.[2] TCRMatch accepts inputs of CDR3β and attempts to identify potentially immunogenic epitopes using a modified BLOcks SUbstitution Matrix (BLOSUM)62 substitution matrix to calculate similarity scores between sequences to determine potential matches. TCRMatch provides several potential epitopes to an input CDR3β, outputting a score between 0 and 1, with 1 being an exact match. Data was manually processed through the webtool on the 27th of May 2022 using a medium (>0.90) score threshold, with results fed through the bioinformatics pipeline for analysis.
 
Predictive analysis of antigen-specificity of TCRβ clonotypes to the MM associated antigen, HM21.4 was performed using the web-based algorithm, TCRex.[3] TCRex outputs two metrics of confidence in TCR-epitope binding; the score and baseline prediction rate (BPR). The score is a confidence number between 0 and 1, like that provided by TCRMatch, with higher values representing greater confidence. The BPR is a measure of how well the algorithm distinguishes the result from the background, with a lower number yielding confidence.
 
Predictive analysis of antigen-specificity of TCR clonotypes against a list of putative myeloma antigens was performed using a web-based algorithm, Extended TCR-Peptide Binding Predictor (ERGO-II).[4] Utility of the webtool involved the creation of a novel R script to automate the process (available https://github.com/JFavaloro/). Briefly, the script extracted all clonotypic information from the four patients and generated individual *.CSV files in the correct ERGO-II format for the webtool against 197 peptides from 58 proteins identified by Walz et al[5] as over-expressed on malignant PC from primary samples relative to both cell-lines and PC from age-matched controls. The script then automated the upload and download of results, culled the results to those with a confidence score of ≥0.9 and re-appended the binding prediction results to the frequency of clonotypes observable in each of the eight samples. The frequency and tissue distribution of potential anti-myeloma clonotypes were then assessed. For samples with paired gene expression data available, ERGO-II results were related back to individual cell barcodes to allow interrogation of the identified clones transcriptional state. Variables used to determine binding values were TRBVJ, TRBJ and CDR3 amino acid sequence (being the variables determined by the authors of the algorithm to contribute most to predicted binding score).[6] Binding predictions were undertaken in an HLA-agnostic manner. Although high resolution HLA-typing was undertaken using arcasHLA,[7] this information was not utilised in the prediction due to concerns regarding legitimacy of results and the aforementioned limited contribution of this information to the binding prediction score.[6]
 
References:
 
1.           Favaloro J, Bryant CE, Abadir E, et al. Single-cell analysis of the CD8(+) T-cell compartment in multiple myeloma reveals disease specific changes are chiefly restricted to a CD69(-) subset suggesting potent cytotoxic effectors exist within the tumor bed. Haematologica. 2024;109(4):1220-1232.
2.           Fleri W, Paul S, Dhanda SK, et al. The Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource in Epitope Discovery and Synthetic Vaccine Design. Front Immunol. 2017;8(278.
3.           Gielis S, Moris P, Bittremieux W, et al. Detection of Enriched T Cell Epitope Specificity in Full T Cell Receptor Sequence Repertoires. Front Immunol. 2019;10(2820.
4.           Springer I, Besser H, Tickotsky-Moskovitz N, Dvorkin S, Louzoun Y. Prediction of Specific TCR-Peptide Binding From Large Dictionaries of TCR-Peptide Pairs. Front Immunol. 2020;11(1803.
5.           Walz S, Stickel JS, Kowalewski DJ, et al. The antigenic landscape of multiple myeloma: mass spectrometry (re)defines targets for T-cell-based immunotherapy. Blood. 2015;126(10):1203-1213.
6.           Springer I, Tickotsky N, Louzoun Y. Contribution of T Cell Receptor Alpha and Beta CDR3, MHC Typing, V and J Genes to Peptide Binding Prediction. Front Immunol. 2021;12(664514.
7.           Orenbuch R, Filip I, Comito D, Shaman J, Pe’er I, Rabadan R. arcasHLA: high-resolution HLA typing from RNAseq. Bioinformatics. 2019;36(1):33-40.
